Table of Contents
=================

[Table of Contents 1](#table-of-contents)

[Table of Figures 2](#table-of-figures)

[Chapter one : History of the present or a political analysis of
Knowledge 3](#_Toc518642455)

[Introduction 3](#introduction)

[Abstract 5](#abstract)

[1. Enumeration, simplification and universalism
6](#enumeration-simplification-and-universalism)

[1.1 Enumeration - The Man Whose Essence was Plotted by a Thousand
Numbers
6](#enumeration---the-man-whose-essence-was-plotted-by-a-thousand-numbers)

[1.2 The Science of Muddling Through: Or from Locals to Universals
7](#the-science-of-muddling-through-or-from-locals-to-universals)

[1.3. What do we loose through enumeration and economical development
8](#what-do-we-loose-through-enumeration-and-economical-development)

[2. Governmentality or science of objectification
9](#governmentality-or-science-of-objectification)

[3. Discussion on Knowledge and information
11](#discussion-on-knowledge-and-information)

[Conclusion 12](#conclusion)

 {#section .ListParagraph}

Table of Figures
================

[Figure 1 Analysis of technological determinism (Misa, 1988)
4](#_Toc518296753)

[]{#_Toc518642455 .anchor}Chapter one : History of the present or a
political analysis of Knowledge

Alternative title: \"profound discontinuity in the history of civilized
man\" Chandler (1984)

*"The Author of Nature writes down the equations, then fixes the
fundamental constants, and finally chooses a series of boundary
conditions."* (Hacking, 1990, p.56)

Introduction
============

Technology is entwined in every aspect of our lives. "*Technologies
feed, clothe, and provide shelter for us; they transport, entertain, and
heal us; they provide the bases of wealth and of leisure; they also
pollute and kill.*" (MacKenzie and Wajcman, 1999, p. 1). Whilst science
and technology are being examined from variety of perspectives, In many
of these argumentations there is a trace of technological determinism
and using "*power language*"(Langdon Winner, 1980, p. 121) is common
amongst both critiques and appraisers of technology. From a political
viewpoint, it is crucial to objectify the technological determinism as
it produces a passive attitude and discourages creative engagement with
technology. From an intellectual standpoint technological determinism
whilst producing knowledge and develops some aspects of our
understanding of technology, it also reduces the relationship between
society and things into a mere cause and effect relationship. Therefor
it is vital to a) develop a historical and political understanding and
awareness of lines of enquiries within the field of science and
technology studies b) develop a creative approach for crafting new
technologies that can deal with fast pace of change and the new and old
needs of our societies and communities. A framework that fosters and
engages not only in crafting and making new technologies but rather it
is involved in shaping it and influencing it towards improvement of our
beings, communities and environments.

Some of the ideas and the beliefs in technological determinism is well
captured in a 5 parts 1993 TV series documentary showing the history of
computers from Babbage to Silicon valley. The tone and narrative of this
series has a model of "before and after an invention" approach. In this
title, the history of computers is being told in a way that once an
invention was introduced to society, it will then have the life of its
own. This belief that technology is the primary force that brings change
to society goes back to early days of industrial revolution. Amongst
individuals who believe in technological determinism, there are two
common approaches that they follow a) soft view b) hard view. Soft view
is based on the belief that social change is caused by technological
change, however technology will be affected and changed by social
pressures. Hard view however does not take into consideration the effect
of social pressures and individuals who take the hard view approach,
believe technology has its own autonomous momentum and force for change.
(Smith and Marx, 1994)

Ulrich Beck in his very influential work in critique of science and
technology states: "...With good reasons one can proceed from the
perspective that the history of sciences was always less a history of
the acquisition of knowledge than one of mistakes and practical lapses.
That is why scienÂ­tific 'knowledge', 'explanations', and practical
'suggested solutions' contradict each other diametrically over time"
(Beck, 1992, p. 159). What Ulrich (1992) argues is the fact that from
18th century until mid twentieth century science functioned as a
monopolised rational force of 'progress' without enough necessary
reflections and critiques of its own practice. He argues that there are
two strands in the modernization process from 'traditional' societies to
industrialised one. The strands are primary and reflexive. In the
primary phase science is "applied to a 'given' world of nature, people
and society. " (Beck, 1992, p. 155). In this phase the scientization
process lacks reflection of its own procedures, however in the second
phase the enlightenment and truth that science promised will get
demystified. The second phase can be traced back as early as the
beginning of twentieth century. The first phase whilst promising to
bring enlightenment, liberty and free us from traditions and naturally
destined ways of life to an industrial one at the same time they end up
in dissolving some of its own values. In the second phase however not
only science is not the sole provider of solutions but rather a cause of
some problems. Don Ihde in his foreword to new waves in philosophy of
technology (Olsen, 2008), traced three main waves of philosophers of
technology. The first wave included scholars such as Marx and Kapp. Kapp
(1877) was one of the first authors who used the title philosophy of
technology in the 19^th^ century. The first wave of thinkers were mainly
concerned with industrial revolution and its consequences. The consensus
among scholars during this wave was barely dystopian. Only after the
great war, came along strong voices of criticism and fear of autonomous
technologies began to rise. Obviously there were also positive voices
such as Franklin and Jefferson "...For them progress meant pursuit of
technology and science in the interest of human betterment..." (Smith
and Marx, 1994, p. 3) at the same time both were concerned with the
implications of large scale technological reformations. Jefferson
emphasized on the delicacy of liberty, virtue and power in society and
how they can easily become corrupted. Ihde argues that it was first the
arts community who raised their concerns and fears of technology. One of
the first works dealing with these new phenomena was Shelley's
Frankenstein. Victor Frankenstein a researcher who has a strong belief
in science, unable to recognise the consequences and ethics of his work
and its creation the monster. Shelly's monster is very similar to how
Beck (1992) describes early twentieth century role and challenges of
science in industrial societies.

![](media/image1.png){width="6.6930555555555555in"
height="3.911111111111111in"}

[]{#_Toc518296753 .anchor}Figure 1 Analysis of technological determinism
(Misa, 1988)

Misa (1988, p. 310) identifies four major groups of philosophers of
technology who technological determinism can be traced in their work.
*"...as a justification for their field, as a theory to be elaborated
(by Ellulians), as a theory to be rejected (by Marxists), and as the
starting premise for a technological politics...".* The deterministic
approach has taken a similar pattern of development amongst historians
of business, cities and science specially between 1977 to mid-eighties.
This decade is portrayed by Misa (1988) as the time where most
historians saw technology the causal force for change in our societies
or at least in Western societies.

Whilst many scholars since mid eighties have been emphasising on the
importance of objectifying determinism, it is also important to remember
that technology should not be considered as both the sole problem maker
and solution provider. Heidegger (1977, p. 3) "*...We shall be
questioning concerning technology, and in so doing we should like to
prepare a free relationship to it.*" What Heidegger attempts to do in
this essay is to represent the essence of technology and by essence, he
means the way something endures its life through time and history. By
essence he refers to the original and true meaning of it and not the one
distorted and corroded through roman translation and later taken by
Christianity. The origin of the word essence comes from physis where
Heidegger defines it as (1961, p. 14) "*Physis is being itself, by
virtue of which essents become and remain observable... Physis means the
power that emerges and the enduring realm under its sway. This power of
emerging and enduring includes \"becoming\" as well as \"being\"*".

One of Heidegger projects was to redefine the concept of "being" as he
believed this would help us to understand and justify our relationship
with many other constructs and things such as technology. In being and
time (Heidegger, 1996) he applies a phenomenological method where he
attempts to define being through a temporal study of human experience.
The ontological approach that he took in being and time however was not
complete and he did not manage to complete the task of redefining being.
In introduction to metaphysics, he tried to continue with his enterprise
however he ended up presenting a detailed critique of western philosophy
and hitherto did not manage to provide a complete understanding of
being. Heidegger compares the word "is" in language to being. He
provides several examples in spoken language where in each sentence "is"
has a different meaning for example The car is mine (belongs to), The
book is in the library (located), the ring is of gold (made of), etc...
In all these examples and many more, "is" contains a prolific
multiplicity of meanings. Similarly for "being" the definite range of
meaning contained by "the sphere of actuality and presence, of
permanence and duration, of abiding and occurrence." (Heidegger, 1961,
p. 92). Similarly, if we were to understand and define the essence of
technology, this does not mean any specific technological thing. Since
technology existed as long as civilizations, what Heidegger tries to
clarify is questioning the basis and definitions of what we perceive as
technology and our relationship with it. He believed (Heidegger, 1977,
p. 26) "when we once open ourselves expressly to the essence of
technology, we find ourselves unexpectedly taken into a freeing claim.".
As shown in the example above with the multiplicity of meaning,
similarly the widely agreed and used definition of technology as a human
activity or a means to an end is also merely an instrumental definition
and does not overlay the real truth about the essence of technology.
What Heidegger is trying to free us from is thinking everything through
the medium of technology, instead of having a free relationship with it.
In his early works until 1955 his work is arguably has a romantic
anti-technology and anti-consumerism approach, potentially due to war
effect similar to other science and technology critics after the Great
War and Second World War. In his later work on the contrary he states
that the concern and worries on the loss and destruction caused by
technology is merely a technological thinking (Dreyfus and Wrathall,
2002). Heidegger emphases on the dangers of technological thinking "In
this dawning atomic age a far greater danger threatens-precisely when
the danger of a third world war has been removed. A strange assertion!
Strange indeed, but only as long as we do not meditate. In what sense is
the statement just made valid? This assertion is valid in the sense that
the approaching tide of technological revolution in the atomic age could
so captivate, bewitch, dazzle, and beguile man that calculative thinking
may someday come to be accepted and practiced as the only way of
thinking." (1966, p. 56) . The technological thinking is when we lose
our ability to mediate and the idea of subjectivity and objectivity
becomes more fluid. Tiqqun (2001, p. 3) reminds us of this danger by
stating that majority of critical thinkers of our time are negligent of
the rise of "*cybernetics as a new technology of government*". He later
states that the cybernetics is based on the projection that all things
(humans and non-humans) and their relationships are inherently
algorithmically conditioned and reconditionable. This is what Foucault
referred to as "piloting" (2005, p. 249) a model consisting of three
techniques medicine, political government and government of the self.
Foucault refers to the post twentieth century piloting as
"governmentality" (Foucault et al., 1991, p. 102). The change that
occurs during this century and beyond is the fact that the piloting is
not merely concerned with self and others but it is concerned with
everything. In July 2014 UK government introduced a new legislation Data
Retention and Investigatory Powers Act 2014 (DRIP) which was later
called snooper\'s charter. This act obliged Internet Service Providers
(ISPs) to regularly capture and store internet and communication
activities of their users. Whist the act was challenged and it is under
review due to high level of public outcry and legal challenges (Cobain,
2018; "Data Retention Directive - ORG Wiki," n.d.) it is one example
amongst many others (for examples see: ) of what Deutsch (1963) called
the "Nerves of Government". Deutsch enterprise was to develop a new
political theory that is concerned with the new era of governmentality.
A politics that offers people the ability to "that men should be more
able to act in politics with their eyes open" (Deutsch, 1963, p. 255).
Barabasi (2003) explores many new field of science being developed in
the 21^st^ century and find many similarities between them and exploring
and introducing new sciences from a cartographic perspectives. Wiener
(1961, p. 39) compares the 18^th^ to early 19^th^ centuries as being the
age of steam engines, he then describes the 20^th^ century as age of
communication and control. Wienar invented an approach of applying
probability and statistical models into a network in order to represent
and reproduce information that is uncertain based on what we know about
a system. This line of enquiry was first developed by Wiener in order to
predict the movement of aircraft during Second World War. The technology
is now more mature and accessible in many occasions free of charge
available online under navigational softwares[^1]. Similar to Barabasi
who compares the network of internet with network of life on our planet
and almost suggest they are indentical, Tiqqun (Tiqqun, 2001, p. 18)
discusses the enterprise of neural network as they try to mimic human
brain (Hecht-Nielsen, 1988; Schmidhuber, 2015). Inviting the reader to
explore the present-day history of economic discourse as an "information
problem" (Foucault (Rose, 1991, p. 105) calls this "Power/knowledge"). A
trend in the last thirty years has started which is refered to as
financlialization which is the control of market over every aspects of
our life ( For example: Russi (2013) shows the effect of market and
informationization of food industry; Martin (2002) provides a detailed
overview of techniques and practices of financialization both through
regulations prioritised by governments as well as its presense in the
education system reshapes a market based approach to everyday life. ;
Sotiropoulos (Sotiropoulos et al., 2013) represents a fresh overview of
capitalist power relations based on financial derivatives. Davis (2009)
representing some of the underlying practices that has changed the
American society and reshaped it into a market centred logic where
individuals are becoming shareholder agents, resulting in many vital
human needs becoming highly dependent on Stock and mortgage markets.
Financialization has also gain much attention within academia, for
example in the UK Digital Economy is a research theme bringing together
fields such as "These include Energy, Transport, Manufacturing, Health
and Care, Creative and Cultural and Service Industries (particularly
those driven by data such as Retail, Insurance, Financial and
Advertising)." ("Digital Economy Theme strategy - EPSRC website," n.d.)
).

Techne is "...denotes neither art nor technology but a knowledge, the
ability to plan and organize freely, to masterinstitutions (cf. Plato\'s
Phaedrus). TechnÃª is creating, building in the sense of a deliberate
pro-ducing." (Heidegger, 1961, p. 11), "tekhnb (an art, a reflected
system of practices referring to general principles, notions, and
concepts" (Foucault, 2005, p. 249)

Need to write about second and third wave. Second wave post great war
and third more recent with people like Harraway...

Winner (1980) calls for more holistic study of technology and to look at
technology through a combination of these approaches. Scholars who
suggest technologies are politically neutral and it is the societies who
use them in certain ways whilst they contribute towards the development
of knowledge and understanding of how societies use technologies,
however they fail to consider the conditions that those software and
hardware were produced in. MacKenzie (1999) states that whilst
technological determinism brings our attention to some important
questions and considerations when dealing with technology, however they
fail to generate a reciprocal relationship between society and
technology, so instead of society shaping technological changes, they
would only have a passive role of adapting to these changes. Since
technology is directly or indirectly affecting every aspects of our life
and society it is important to develop a firm understanding of
technological change and how it is shaped and formed within our
societies.

One popular explanation of what shapes technology is the view that
suggest technology is shaped and formed based on scientific discoveries
and explorations.

Abstract
========

This chapter looks at the last 400 years of enumeration, high modernism
and financialisation to provide a map of inter-related actors that
created the world the way it is today. This will be through three
lenses, from the perspective of knowledge production (Epistemology),
Relationship between knowledge forms, corporations and legislation
(technology) and finally last few decades of finantialisation. This
chapter aims to thread through an amalgamation of philosophies,
legislations, social movements and scientific breakthroughs which
started during 16^th^ century and continued to this moment. These
changes and approaches to individuals, society and community have
changed our relationships not just with one another, but with the world
to an extensive level. The purpose for the next two chapters are to
identify some concerns and challenges caused by science and technology?

1. Enumeration, simplification and universalism
===============================================

"Every state happy or unhappy, was statistical in its own way." (Scott,
1998, p.16)

This section examines the dichotomy between localized forms of situated
knowledge and coercive, universal ones crafted by institutions of
liberal democratic regimes. The first section briefly explores the
notion of enumeration, some of its examples and in particular relevant
studies tracing these practices starting in the last 400 years. Section
2 looks at the epistemological aspects of these practices, how do we get
around to produce such knowledge forms. And the last section of this
chapter will look technology, finance and financializaiton. Finally,
this section provides some suggestions and arguments towards certain
changes and approaches that could develop new forms of design thinking,
leading ultimately to more commensurable knowledge networks.

I would like to begin this section by summarising a story by Georges
Perec, Life: A User\'s Manual (1978): in his book Perec, tells the story
of a millionaire in an apartment block, paused in time with an exquisite
detailed description of each room in the building. In great detail he
describes the vast array of things in the building: the furniture, the
setting, the atmosphere. The millionaire employs a puzzle maker, a
painter and chemist for a task similar to that in Camus' *The Myth of
Sisyphus*. He then chooses 62 sceneries from around the world, where the
painter would turn them into watercolor paintings, the puzzle maker into
increasingly complicated puzzles. He then spends two weeks solving them,
before finally erasing them and turning them back to a blank canvas by
using the chemicals made by the chemist. At the end of the story, the
main character is running away from a person who is trying to stop him
from ruining all the artworks. The millionaire dies whilst holding a
puzzle piece in a shape of the letter "W", however the last remaining
piece of the puzzle is in the shape of letter X.

This story is a prescient metaphor for our data-centred contemporary
lives. If we replace the characters and the style of the game, taking a
moment to reflect on it and compare it to big-data society with
statistics and numbers about every aspect of our life, these numbers
become the puzzles pieces, with data mining institutions such as
Facebook and Google the puzzle makers whilst being the puzzle solvers
(millionaire) at the same time. The artist would be the 'establishment'.
Perec's aim was to tell the story of one life through the complex
networks of many lives and objects: however, in this chapter I argue
that the institutions of liberal democracies are reducing society into
categorized, simplified, and reductive individuals. James C. Scott
(Scott, 1998, p.184) calls this the "civilizing process" or
"domestication", which has three sub-processes: "sedentarization",
"concentration" and "radical simplification". Although sedentarization
is outside of the scope of this chapter (see: Urry, 2004; Cresswell,
1993; Adams, 1999), the other two sub-processes will be discussed in the
next sections

1.1 Enumeration - The Man Whose Essence was Plotted by a Thousand Numbers 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

*"Legibility is a condition of manipulation. Any substantial state
intervention in society \... requires the invention of units that are
visible. The units in question might be citizens, villages, trees,
fields, houses, or people grouped according to age, depending on the
type of intervention"* (Scott, 1998, p.183)

Charles Babbage writing in 1832 noted the importance of collecting
numbers, calling it "the constants of Nature and of Art" (Babbage,
1832). His idea was to summon the list of all facts that could be
expressed in mere numbers. This dream, however wasn\'t a dream started
by Babbage, for its roots goes far back before even when Comte coined
the term positivism. Equally, around 1685 both Leibniz in Prussia and
Petty in England made recommendations about creating statistical centres
that would collect data about the population allowing the state to
foresee the future and measure its power. State-based statistics was a
process originally aimed at measuring colonies rather than home,
however, it became the practice of the state both internally and
externally as best described by Hacking (1990, p.16): "Every state happy
or unhappy, was statistical in its own way." Further to this Scott
(1998) emphasizes the notion of unambiguous identification as one of the
main strategies of state power over the last two hundred years. He
follows the traces of these strategies not only in the administration of
nature such as the German engineering of forests, or the development of
new beehives, but also in identification of their residents.

Again, this become normalized to the extent that the notion of surnames
as modes of identification has become so embedded in everyday life that
it is almost taken as *a priori*. Traditionally, surnames names were
primarily a form of identification based on local knowledge: for
example, as Scott notes, in England if there were multiple Johns, then
locational or occupational clues would be used to reduce ambiguity. For
instance, John Hill referring to John who lives on the Hill, or John
Mills, John who owned a mill.[^2] Foucault\'s conception of biopolitics
and anatomopolitics is described by Hacking as the statistical
establishment of the last three hundred years. We see the biopolitical
starting around 1763 under the reign of Fredrich the Great for the
purpose of restoring and managing the vanished population after seven
years of war. This process then continues and gave birth in the next
hundred years to centralized institutions specialized in collecting,
creating and analysing numbers about people and things, as described by
Hacking (1990, p.34): "The institutions brought a new kind of man into
being, the man whose essence was plotted by a thousand numbers". Using
one of Scott's (1998, p.4) four elements of the birth of the modern
state, the measurement of the subject by enumeration is the
"administrative ordering of nature and society". Critically the process
of ordered gridding of the social becomes embedded in the fabric of
everyday life to the extent that essence and appearance become
interchangeable. The other three elements contributing to the birth of
modern states are high modernist ideology, which is a by-product of
science and technology "progress", emergency powers that sprang up at
difficult times such as war and famine which gives them unquestionable
power to initiate utopian/heterotopian ideas and social engineering
projects and lastly weak citizen mobilisation, engagement and power.

1.2 The Science of Muddling Through: Or from Locals to Universals
-----------------------------------------------------------------

*"...The existence of French men and women around 1790 was made
miserable by, among other things, 700 or 800 differently named measures
and untold units of the same name but different sizes. A \"**pinte\" in
Paris came to 0.93 liter; in Saint-Denis, to 1.46; in Seine-en-Montagne,
to 1.99; in PrÃ©cy-sous-Thil, to 3.33. The aune, a unit of length, was
still more prolific: Paris had three"* (FrÃ¤ngsmyr et al., 1990, p.207)

The above quote is an example of local knowledge forms, and their
commensurability depending on where, and how, and which community is
subjected to them. There is also a trace of universalism in the
description of these measurements and the coming need to standardize
them. Scott (1998, p.254) documented this process of standardization by
looking at the political-aesthetics of modernism: he discusses the
visual and aesthetic aspects of high modernist approaches in Ethiopian,
Romanian and Tanzanian 'villagization'. This is a prominent aspect and
process that many communities faced during the forced transformation
from "primitive" to "modern" aesthetics. The primitive was seen as more
"irregular, dispersed, complicated, unmechanised" as opposed to the
modern which was "tidy, rectilinear, uniform, concentrated, simplified,
mechanized". For Scott "many state activities aim at transforming the
population, space, and nature under their jurisdiction into the closed
systems that offer no surprises and that can best be observed and
controlled" (1998, p.82). The question of control through cartographic
vision and surveillance is a significant aspect of Scott's work on the
modern state's attempt to make the natural and social world *legible,*
that is readable and knowable. Fundamentally this involves a
concentration of vision, or as Scott sees it, a "narrowing of the field
of vision" (1998, p.13), resulting in the delimitation of a field of
knowledge that brackets-off or narrows complexity through spatial,
temporal and epistemological regimentation and gridding. This process of
making legible implies a set of representational mechanisms such as the
cadastral map, censuses and "standardized units of measurement" (Scott,
1998, p.77) all designed to hold meaning, and the natural and social
worlds stable. Such mechanisms of making the world legible not only
concern how the world was viewed, but also how it was produced and
appropriated.

Such processes, in place since the beginning of the 16th century, have
been responsible for dramatic changes in the government and management
of life, both from individual and national perspectives (Hacking, 1990).
Science and technology were central engines to these changes through
both methodological and technological approaches towards truth and
determinism (Gibbons et al., 1994). This was the creation of the
problematic space of universalism, whose ultimate goal was the
simplification of the complexity and multiplicity of localized
practices. Hacking (1990, p.11) describes these universalistic
approaches as the birth of "objective knowledge" or in Porterian (1996,
p.46) terms the "social technology" of quantification---a form of
knowledge based on statistical modelling. Objective knowledge was born
through two key movements, firstly, the discovery that the world is not
deterministic, and secondly, the transformation of society and people
into mere number. These two changes have created four successful effects
on the society: metaphysical, epistemological, logical and ethical. In
all four categories Hacking (1990) traces the imperialism of
probabilities. The success of these categories is ultimately proven by
the fact that they have profoundly altered the direction and perception
of society.

One would expect the relationship between indeterminism and statistics
to be an opposing equation, however it is the opposite: the recognition
of indeterminism results in greater statistical control. This is
evidenced by the exponential growth of enumeration in both the physical
and natural sciences: the mass publication of numbers and statistics;
annual reports; population enumerations such as life span, death
rates;[^3] and health measurements. On the other hand, these mere
simplifications do not only remain as numbers or statistics, rather they
turn into policies, politics, and affective emotions, ultimately
creating a social realm in which we live under the shadow of
numbers.[^4]

addaddNotes + explanation of essense and appearance\....

1.3. What do we loose through enumeration and economical development
--------------------------------------------------------------------

*"Market culture undermines traditional communities wherever it
penetrates -- just as it has undermined community on its home turf for
the last four hundred years"*(Marglin, 2008, p.246)

Marglin (2008, p.245) believes that since the last decades of 15^th^
century (beginning of the age of western exploration) imperialism,
development, and globalisation were the three inter linked prominent
ingredients of West meeting the rest of the world. In the previous
sections I have shown the relationship between enumerations,
simplification and universalism and how enumeration is the technology of
governance. This section I will draw an image of some of the intended
and unintended consequences of such practices. I would like to start
this section by a story from development of sports wear in China.

Athletic shoes is the US is a \$15 billion industry with about 107
million pairs being bought for children in America (The Washington Post,
2002, p.4), Marglin (2008, p.228) goes further into the details of
production and supply chain:

*"An \$80 pair of sneakers includes perhaps \$3.00 of wages for a worker
in China, South or Southeast Asia, or the Caribbean -- less than 4% of
the total price. The rest is materials (say \$11), rent and other
operating costs of the factory owner (another \$3), and the profits of
factory owner (another \$2 or so). All this brings the cost to Nike ...
to \$18."*

In this case study, one can see a large profit and income inequity
between the Eastern manufacturers and Western brands and distributers.
Another hidden element here is the distance and a sense of disconnection
that this enumeration brings into globalised and international relations
between different actors of supply and demand chains. Neither the \$3
wages nor the \$80 product price is showing the atrocities and struggles
that human and non human actors endeavour in order for an American child
to wear a sports shoes. This is what Marglin (2008, p.238) calls
"Conventional wage". Conventional wage is the calculation of wages based
on the producing countries and opportunities available to them rather
than humane solidarity with those in direct affect. This disconnection
and imperialism has many branches, another one of the prominent
concerning aspect of globalisation is destruction of cultures. Marglin
definition of culture is close to what I have traced in this chapter
about situated knowledge forms. For Marglin (2008, p.245), culture is a
form of "\...shared participation in producing and exchanging goods and
services; about governing, entertaining, and mourning; and about
generating and regenerating people physically, morally and spiritually."
.....

Just as Hacking (1990) argued that enumeration and statistics was a
technology that has been used in colonies, it then later on became a
technology for governing their own population, another technology of
colonisers were imperialism and vanishing non-western cultures which
then gave birth to globalisation which also universalised culture both
in the new worlds and back at home in Europe. This created a sense of
"imagined community" as Marglin labeled it (2008). After all of these
counting and justifying the negativities of enumeration and
globalisation, it is important also to remember their positive aspects
in order to seek out commensurable solutions and think openly about
solutions to these complex and multifaceted problems of universalism and
reduction of cultures and communities. If we partially agree that
globalisation and enumeration also have positive elements then the
central question here would be "how we as a community, designers,
technologists and scientists would position ourselves in the spectrum
between community and globalisation, between deliberation and consensus,
between participation and representation?"

2. Governmentality or science of objectification
================================================

*"Social power of a collective is a function of the distribution of
knowledge over the collective"* (Bellamy, 1993, p.211)

Foucault in mid 70s published two major works: Discipline and Punish
(Foucault, 1991) and History of Sexuality (Foucault, 1984; Foucault,
1992; Foucault, 1990). The former work were more concerned with the role
of body and soul as the locus for the practice of power, the move from
traditional forms of torture to newer forms. In that work Foucault
emphasised 4 guidelines in the study of power:

1.  Study of punitive mechanisms has to look both at punitive mechanisms
    on their "repressive" as well as possible positive effects. For
    instance punishment then would be regarded as a complex social
    function.

2.  Punitive methods should not be considered simply as a causation of
    legislation but also as specialised techniques or in Foucault\'s
    words political tactic.

3.  History of penal law and human sciences may derive from same source
    a single process of "epistemologico-juridical" formation; in short,
    Foucault believe that technology of power should be one of the
    prominent principles of both study of the humanization of the penal
    system and of the knowledge of man.

4.  In short, punitive methods should be studied as a history of power
    relations and object relations. (Foucault, 1991)

Both of the works mentioned above concerned with the importance of
keeping an analytical eye on the exercise of power as not just a
negative or repressive force, but also their metamorphosis. What
Foucault showed through these two works was complex reciprocal relations
between the political investment of the body and its economical use.
From mid seventies, Foucault took on the task of developing his new
theoretical framework of analysing power and he coined two prominent
terms "Power/Knowledge" (Rouse, 2003, p.105) and "Governmentality"
(Foucault et al., 1991, p.102). As shown in section 1 of this chapter,
What Foucault and other scholars traced, was the transformation of the
technologies of government from mid sixteenth century onwards. A move
from "multitude of treatises presented as advice to the prince" to "art
of government" (Foucault et al., 1991, p.87). The former is not the
concern of this thesis, therefor the focus will be from 16^th^ century
onwards. Art of government started to form shape initially in the
sixteenth century with questions concerned with government of oneself
which developed approaches such as stoicism. Also problematics of
governing lives and souls which was the locus of Catholic and Protestant
doctrine. The list continues with the government of children, pedagogy,
health and so on. These concerns and processes, gave birth to the death
of feudalism, and rise of establishments, imperialism and colonial
states. An interesting change here is the domain and use of law itself,
from being a punitive and instrument of sovereignty to becoming a
guiding technology. Law traditionally was an instrument for the common
good, something all subjects would obey without exception as long as the
law was in accordance with the laws of the master or the king or God the
the ultimate sovereignty. Through the transformations of the 17^th^
century, however law then became one of the tactics of governance. The
idea of economy as the government of the family and how art of
government becoming a series of interventions and complex processes
formed through use of numbers, laws, legislations, sovereignty and other
technologies of government. Instead of government being about
sovereignty of the prince over a territory it became about meeting ends
and specific certitudes. (Foucault et al., 1991)

*"Wisdom, understood no longer in the traditional sense as knowledge of
divine and human laws, of justice and equality, but rather as the
knowledge of things, of the objectives that can and should be attained,
and the disposition of things required to reach them; it is this
knowledge that is to constitute the wisdom of the sovereign."(Foucault
et al., 1991, p.96)*

It is useful to also mention a text referred to by Foucault: Le miroir
politique from 1555 (Dexter, 1955) where La PerriÃ¨re defined government
as "the right disposition of things, arranged so as to lead to a
convenient end". Some examples of convenient ends (programs) could be,
reproduction, expansion of territories and improvement of health. This
text by La Perriere, marks the beginning of the transformations
mentioned earlier. So government becomes about right disposition of
things. It is important to understand, in this analysis the relationship
between government and "body politic" (Hobbes & Curley, 1994, p.146) is
not a top down one, but a multifaceted network of technologies and
tactics to achieve finalities. Through the development of science of
governing, we have shown that economy became central again, however now
on a different axis and plane. *"The constitution of a savoir of
government is absolutely inseparable from that of a knowledge of all the
processes related to population in Its larger sense: that is to say,
what we now call the economy"* (Foucault et al., 1991, p.100). Economy
and statistics from being a technology in the hands feudals, it is
becoming a form of "savoir" concerned with all aspects of "body
politic". It is crucial not to misunderstand the analytical framework
here by assuming that sovereignty is being replaced by disciplined
society and discipline by art of government. Instead there is a
triangular relationship between these three elements: Government,
discipline and sovereignty. This triangle gave birth to a new
problematic space called population, or in Habermasian terms: "wild
life" which is a space "a field of intervention and an objective of
governmental techniques" or "governmentality" (Foucault et al., 1991,
p.102). The move from feudal territorial regime (Laws: amalgamation of
obligation and litigation) to administrative state (National boundaries,
discipline and regulation) to governmental state was not directed by an
"invisible hand" (Smith, 1930, p.288), but through a reciprocal net-work
of actors such as science, technology, statistics and new problematic
spaces creating, changing and mediating one another. This is the
important lesson and analytical technique to take from foucaudian
studies of power. What was important to Foucault was not only the forms
of knowledge being produced, but how and through what techniques they
would become authoritative and intelligable. This approach to power
would allow us to develop a better understanding of why and how our
financial system is the way it is today and how we can develop ways to
engage with it, scrutinise and understand it?

Howells defined knowledge as "Knowledge can be defined as a dynamic
framework or structure from which information can be stored, processed
and understood."(Howells, 2002, p.872). What should be remembered here
from what we have discussed earlier is Who stored the knowledge, who
process it, How it has been processed? and for the understanding of
whom? Jasanoff discusses the implications of the techniques that
governments developed to control and legislate knowledge production
through some quantified measures which she calls technologies of hubris.
The purpose of these technologies is to provide confidence and certainty
within the society, as oppose to technologies of humility which they are
about bringing doubt and uncertainty. (Newell, 2012; Jasanoff, 2005)

In previous sections, we discussed some of the un/intented consequences
of technological advancements and enumeration. Bill Joy, one of the
chief scientinst at Sun Microsystems raises an important point about
technological advancements, which is their unquestioned acceptance in
society. How quickly we familiarise ourselves with them, which brings in
the next problematic which is how much our modern institutions are
concerned with these technological dizziness in order to reduce the
damages incured as part of the process of "progress". Whilst this
advancements offer some benefits, they can not at the same time protect
us from the damages caused by technological advancements(Jasanoff, 2005;
Lewis, 2015). Another un/intended bi-products of "power/knowledge"
practices of modern democratic regimes is the birth of centres and
fragmented public of experts. For Jasanoff *"The issue, in other words,
is no longer whether the public should have a say in technical
decisions, but how to promote more meaningful interaction among
policy-makers, scientific experts, corporate producers, and the public"*
(2005, p.238). Jasanoff states, the prominent issue we are facing in
modern societies is how to live within a democratic context in peace
whilst having the knowledge that we are inevitably at risk. This
technological dizziness arguably can be managed at least from two
perspectives, one is from the political dimension of science and
technology and their relationship to society. And the other is about
openness of technology firms and scientists about the intended and
unintended consequences of such tools. Nowtony (2001) emphasis on the
importance of reconnecting the knowledgable publics to the technological
and scientific production process as they were traditionally excluded.
For Nowtony participaotry methods can be agrued as some of the recent
remedies for this issue, for instance citizen juries, consensus
conferences, and referenda. Gibbons also emphasises on this very similar
problem, but offers a different approach which is about introducing more
transparency and regulation on science as the prominent mode of
knowledge production (Gibbons et al., 1994). Jasanoff argues the main
question that seeks our attention to connect these fragmented publics of
experts, policy-makers, scientists and the general public should be "how
to promote more meaningful interaction\...". Interstingly the
terminology used to describe these publics[^5] is another example of
these exclusions (i.e. publics from knowledge production pipelines).
Further Jasanoff discusses the implications of the techniques that
governments developed to control and legislate knowledge production
through some quantified measures which she calles technologies of
hubris, the purpose of these technologies is to provide confidence and
certainty within the society, as oppose to technologies of humility
which they are about bringing doubt and uncertainty (Newell, 2012;
Jasanoff, 2005). Jasanoff calles these technologies of hubris,
predictive methods, which are about giving more attention to short-term
risks rather than long-term, undetermined ones. Rose (1991) shows the
relationship between quantification and democratic government or on the
other hand democratic power and calculating power. He categorises
enumerations into four groups: Numerical calculations of minorities and
majorities, linking governments with governed such as opinion polls,
authoritative power over national life: balance in payments, growth
national product, and lastly governing calculations: tax returns, counts
of population. Rose goes on into discussing how these enumerations could
be used as political "social technologies", which is the very same track
traced by other scholars in many other disciplines such as (ADD
AGRICULTURE, STS, \...).

Technologies of the hubris or "administrative ordering of nature and
society" according to Scot (Scott, 1998, p.4) is one of the four
elements that contributes to the birth of modern states that tend to
create large scale organised systems, cities, grids and states. The next
three elements are high modernist ideology, which is a by-product of
science and technology "progress", emergency powers that sprang up at
difficult times such as war, famine and so on which gives them
unquestionable power to initiate utopian ideas and social engineering
projects and lastly weak citizen mobilisation, engagement and power
(Scott, 1998). If we persue with the same expert knowledge production
techniques, humanities and social researchers have the important role of
deliberating and bringing some of these long terms disastrerous effects
of sicence and technology into the locus of general public, however as
mentioned earlier, we are also dealing with a society who quickly adapts
and accpets unknown changes, which results in a fast pace of
technological advancements a condition that Lindblom () calles "all
thumbs and no fingers", with anthropologists, socialogists and social
researchers out of breath left behind in the "field". This even makes it
more important for a new sets of technologies as Jasanoff calles them
"technologies of humility".

3. Discussion on Knowledge and information
==========================================

*"\...But with the repression of political life in the land as a whole,
\...without unrestricted freedom of press and assembly, without a free
struggle of opinion, life dies out in every public institution, becomes
a mere semblance of life, in which only the bureaucracy remains as the
active element. Public life gradually falls asleep, a few dozen party
leaders of inexhaustible energy and boundless experience direct and
rule."*(Luxemburg, 1992, p.72)

Polanyi defines two types of knowledge, tacit and explicit. Explicit is
when there is no need to experience the knowledge directly and it can be
reproduced through use of mediums, for instance language. Tacit
knowledge as polanyi calles it "subception" is a form of knowledge that
can not be codified, and it is through a learned experience for instance
the craft knowledge, however some believe that this can be learned
through codification. Howells (2002) suggest that based on looking at
knowledge spillover studies, "tacit knowledge, situation and locational
context" are prominent element in the process of knowledge distribution.
Another characteristic of knowledge is accessibility, Howells (2002)
categorises knowledge into postriori and priori knowledge. Posteriori is
something that can be purchased and Priori is something that acquired
through contracts R&D and research agreements according. There is also
another strategy to acquire knowledge which is employing knowledge
labour directy (i.e. scientists, researchers and so on).

The main purpose of these methods are to bring into attention the long
term, intended and unintended consequences of new developments. This can
be followed from four perspectives as Jasanoff argues, framing analysis,
vulnerability, distribution and learning.

Flow of information between individuals

Knowledge spillovers

Leaks

interpretation

acquisition

knowledge movement

Ownership and secrecy

Temporality of knowledge

when should knowledge be shared

time between codified knowledge and interpretation and digestion time.

internal & external forms of knowledge transfer

Knowledge spillovers

-   Trade as a process that transfers knowledge through goods

-   Movement of individuals with their learned knowledge

Economy of knowledge: Demand, consumption and production of knowledge

Affective knowledge

Geography

State

culture

Now in order to understand the level of spillover types of knowledge
available to us about the financial sector, we need to look at the
regulation and legislation in the UK about the financial institutions.
This will be focus of next section.

Information and confirmaiton bias

consensuse and discursive.

Represantative and minority issue

prejeduces

Knowledge exchange strategies

Conclusion
==========

*"To be governed is to be watched over, inspected, spied on, directed,
legislated, regimented, closed in, indoctrinated, preached at,
controlled, assessed, evaluated, censored, commanded; all by creatures
that have neither the right, nor wisdom, nor virtue. . . . To be
governed means that at every move, operation, or transaction one is
noted, registered, entered in a census, taxed, stamped, priced,
assessed, patented, licensed, authorized, recommended, admonished,
prevented, reformed, set right, corrected."(Chomsky, 2003, p.17)*

Bhagwati (2007) one of the defenders of the globalisation, provides wide
range of reasons to why globalisation is a positive force and it should
be supported and inforced further, however he fails to justify his
claims and he does not provide evidence to his claims. As shown in this
chapter whilst I do no agree with Bhagwati\'s point about speeding up
free market processes, I do agree that it is important to avoid
completely crossing out some of the benefits that technological
advancement brought into our lives. For example infant death rate has
been significantly reduced through modern medicine and technological
advancement, as well as many other health improvements, travel
affordances, access to information through the internet and so on. The
position that this thesis has however is a reconciling one. Scot (1998,
p.311) argues that high modernism is in continues struggle with local
knowledge. This is often through use of science as a dominant and
imperial view which then called other forms of practical knowledge
something between superstitions and insignificant. Scott (1998) suggests
that, the high modernist manifestations have not fully instructed in our
societies due to three factors, citizens private sphere of acting within
the society, free market and lastly existence of labour and independent
institutions like the unions that they resisted some of the changes that
the establishments planned to initiate. Jacob (1992, p.32) argues that
the "public peace" becomes possible not through the force of police,
architectural planning, but through a "network of voluntarily controls
and standards among the people themselves, and enforced by the people
themselves."

If we refer to all dynamic, practical knowledge forms as metis, looking
at some complex human interactions shows the complexity of acuiring
metis, for example a boxer who needs to learn many automatic responses
to opponents moves through practice, this shows the fact that the
essential part of acquiring metis is the experience itself (Scott, 1998,
p.315). Acquiring metis that can be tranformed into action is a big
challenge as the channels and methods to acquire any knowledge about the
consequences of intitutional practices is through eighter biased media
or through complicated channels of knowledge acquiring which requires
much experience and specialisation. An evidence to this point is the
fact that there are hundreds of organisations being specialist as puzzle
makers who put the dispersed information togethwer to develop an image
of an organisaiton, like corporatewatch, IRIS, Ethical screening as so
on.

So the cruicial question to consider is:

How design can foster a new relationship with technology, a relationship
that can offer a commensurable space for communities to take advantage
of technology. Technologies that support community practices and their
actor-hood and not technologies who support certain actor-hood that fits
into the categorised and simplified communities of the googles and
facebooks.

Next chapter will look at Knowledge forms available within Britain about
the financial sector, who produce them and their relationship with
gevening technologies of British governement. Only after these two
analysis we will be able to think about ways that can offer new
techniques of citizen participation and deliberation which will be the
focus of chapter 3.

[^1]: Flightradar24 (Flightradar24, n.d.) shows a real-time flights
    information. In August 2015 security experts raised a terror attack
    on a royal helicopter due to the information about the aircraft
    being accessible via the website (Batchelor, 2015).

[^2]: For examples of statistics about colonies see Necochea LÃ³pez
    (2010), in Britain and India (Cohn, 1996). In Scotland this was
    instigated largely by Sinclair (Sinclair, 1791). For the
    anthropological study of colonialism see Pels (1997).

[^3]: The first life insurance policy was issued in England in 1583
    (Raynes, 1948, p.113)

[^4]: Although outside of the purview of this short paper it should be
    noted that the application of the politics of enumeration has been
    seen across all sectors of the social, from agriculture (Fitzgerald,
    2005a; Fitzgerald, 2005b), economy and community (Marglin, 2008), to
    art and science238).anoff, 2003, p.that is where the public are
    fully engaged in the process of knowledge production. She argues or
    doing so sh)

[^5]: We separate different communities by their expertise, such as
    policy-makers, experts, scientific community and then we have
    general public which sounds like a public with no purpose or
    expertise which only suffice the role of being a consumer.
